# Inflammation, Inflammatory Disorders, and Wound Healing

Inflammation, Inflammatory Disorders, and Wound Healing

13

D. Fever
1. Pyrogens (e.g., LPS from bacteria) cause macrophages to release IL-1
and TNF, which increase cyclooxygenase activity in perivascular cells of
the hypothalamus.
2. Increased PGE2 raises temperature set point.
IV. NEUTROPHIL ARRIVAL AND FUNCTION
A. Step 1 - Margination
1. Vasodilation slows blood flow in postcapillary venules.
2. Cells marginate from center of flow to the periphery.
B. Step 2 - Rolling
1. Selectin "speed bumps" are upregulated on endothelial cells.
i. P-selectin release from Weibel-Palade bodies is mediated by histamine.
ii. E-selectin is induced by TNF and IL-1.
2. Selectins bind sialyl Lewis X on leukocytes.
3. Interaction results in rolling of leukocytes along vessel wall.
C. Step 3 - Adhesion
1. Cellular adhesion molecules (ICAM and VCAM) are upregulated on
endothelium by TNF and IL-1.
2. Integrins are upregulated on leukocytes by C5a and LTB4•
3. Interaction between CAMs and integrins results in firm adhesion of leukocytes to
the vessel wall.
4. Leukocyte adhesion deficiency is most commonly due to an autosomal recessive
defect of integrins (CD18 subunit).
i. Clinical features include delayed separation of the umbilical cord, increased
circulating neutrophils (due to impaired adhesion of marginated pool of
leukocytes), and recurrent bacterial infections that lack pus formation.
D. Step 4 - Transmigration and Chemotaxis
1. Leukocytes transmigrate across the endothelium of postcapillary venules and
move toward chemical attractants (chemotaxis).
2. Neutrophils are attracted by bacterial products, IL-8, C5a, and LTB4.
E. Step 5 - Phagocytosis
1. Consumption of pathogens or necrotic tissue; phagocytosis is enhanced by
opsonins (IgG and C3b).
2. Pseudopods extend from leukocytes to form phagosomes, which are internalized
and merge with lysosomes to produce phagolysosomes.
3. Chediak-Higashi syndrome is a protein trafficking defect (autosomal recessive)
characterized by impaired phagolysosome formation. Clinical features include
i. Increased risk of pyogenic infections
ii. Neutropenia (due to intramedullary death of neutrophils)
iii. Giant granules in leukocytes (due to fusion of granules arising from the Golgi
apparatus)
iv. Defective primary hemostasis (due to abnormal dense granules in platelets)
v. Albinism
vi. Peripheral neuropathy
F. Step 6 - Destruction of phagocytosed material
1. O2-dependent killing is the most effective mechanism.
2. HOCl generated by oxidative burst in phagolysosomes destroys phagocytosed
microbes.
i. O2 is converted to O 2 ꜙ by NADPH oxidase (oxidative burst).
ii. O2ꜙ is converted to H2O2 by superoxide dismutase (SOD).
iii. H2O2 is converted to HOCl (bleach) by myeloperoxidase (MPO).

---

14

FUNDAMENTALS OF PATHOLOGY

«

3. Chronic granulomatous disease (CGD) is characterized by poor O2-dependent
killing.
i. Due to NADPH oxidase defect (X-linked or autosomal recessive)
ii. Leads to recurrent infection and granuloma formation with catalase-positive
organisms, particularly Staphylococcus aureus, Pseudomonas cepacia,
Serratia marcescens, Nocardia, and Aspergillus
iii. Nitroblue tetrazolium test is used to screen for CGD. Leukocytes are
incubated with NBT dye, which turns blue if NADPH oxidase can convert
O2 to O2ꜙ, but remains colorless if NADPH oxidase is defective.
4. MPO deficiency results in defective conversion of H2O2 to HOCl.
i. Increased risk for Candida infections; however, most patients are
asymptomatic.
ii. NBT is normal; respiratory burst (O2 to H2O2) is intact.
5. O2-independent killing is less effective than O2 -dependent killing and occurs via
enzymes present in leukocyte secondary granules (e.g., lysozyme in macrophages
and major basic protein in eosinophils).

G. Step 7 - Resolution
1. Neutrophils undergo apoptosis and disappear within 24 hours after resolution of
the inflammatory stimulus.
V. MACROPHAGES

A. Macrophages predominate after neutrophils and peak 2-3 days after inflammation
begins.
1. Derived from monocytes in blood
B. Arrive in tissue via the margination, rolling, adhesion, and transmigration sequence
C. Ingest organisms via phagocytosis (augmented by opsonins) and destroy
phagocytosed material using enzymes (e.g., lysozyme) in secondary granules (O 2independent killing)
D. Manage the next step of the inflammatory process. Outcomes include
1. Resolution and healing - Anti-inflammatory cytokines (e.g., IL-10 and TGFβ) are produced by macrophages.
2. Continued acute inflammation - marked by persistent pus formation; IL-8
from macrophages recruits additional neutrophils.
3. Abscess - acute inflammation surrounded by fibrosis; macrophages mediate
fibrosis via fibrogenic growth factors and cytokines.
4. Chronic inflammation - Macrophages present antigen to activate CD4+
helper T cells, which secrete cytokines that promote chronic inflammation.

CHRONIC INFLAMMATION
I. BASIC PRINCIPLES
A. Characterized by the presence of lymphocytes and plasma cells in tissue (Fig. 2.lB)
B. Delayed response, but more specific (adaptive immunity) than acute inflammation
C. Stimuli include (1) persistent infection (most common cause); (2) infection with
viruses, mycobacteria, parasites, and fungi; (3) autoimmune disease; (4) foreign
material; and (5) some cancers.
II. T LYMPHOCYTES
A. Produced in bone marrow as progenitor T cells
B. Further develop in the thymus where the T-cell receptor (TCR) undergoes
rearrangement and progenitor cells become CD4 + helper T cells or CD8 + cytotoxic T
cells
1. T cells use TCR complex (TCR and CD3) for antigen surveillance.

---

Inflammation, Inflammatory Disorders, and Wound Healing

15

2. TCR complex recognizes antigen presented on MHC molecules.
i. CD4+ T cells - MHC class II
ii. CD8+ T cells - MHC class I
3. Activation of T cells requires (1) binding of antigen/MHC complex and (2)
an additional 2nd signal.
C. CD4 + helper T-cell activation
1. Extracellular antigen (e.g., foreign protein) is phagocytosed, processed, and
presented on MHC class II, which is expressed by antigen presenting cells
(APCs).
2. B7 on APC binds CD28 on CD4 + helper T cells providing 2nd activation signal.
3. Activated CD4 + helper T cells secrete cytokines that "help" inflammation and are
divided into two subsets.
i. TH1 subset secretes IFN-γ (activates macrophage, promotes B-cell class
switching from IgM to IgG, promotes TH1phenotype and inhibits TH2
phenotype).
ii. T H 2 subset secretes IL-4 (facilitates B-cell class switching to IgE), IL-5
(eosinophil chemotaxis and activation, and class switching to IgA), and IL-13
(function similar to IL-4).
D. CD8 + cytotoxic T-cell activation
1. Intracellular antigen (derived from proteins in the cytoplasm) is processed and
presented on MHC class I, which is expressed by all nucleated cells and platelets.
2. IL-2 from CD4 + TH1 cell provides 2nd activation signal.
3. Cytotoxic T cells are activated for killing.
4. Killing occurs via
i. Secretion of perforin and granzyme; perforin creates pores that allow
granzyme to enter the target cell, activating apoptosis.
ii. Expression of FasL, which binds Fas on target cells, activating apoptosis
III. B LYMPHOCYTES
A. Immature B cells are produced in the bone marrow and undergo immunoglobulin
rearrangements to become naïve B cells that express surface IgM and IgD.
B. B-cell activation occurs via
1. Antigen binding by surface IgM or IgD; results in maturation to IgM- or IgDsecreting plasma cells
2. B-cell antigen presentation to CD4+ helper T cells via MHC class IL
i. CD40 receptor on B cell binds CD40L on helper T cell, providing 2nd
activation signal.
ii. Helper T cell then secretes IL-4 and IL-5 (mediate B-cell isotype switching,
hypermutation, and maturation to plasma cells).
IV. GRANULOMATOUS INFLAMMATION
A. Subtype of chronic inflammation
B. Characterized by granuloma, which is a collection of epithelioid histiocytes
(macrophages with abundant pink cytoplasm), usually surrounded by giant cells and
a rim of lymphocytes
C. Divided into noncaseating and caseating subtypes
1. Noncaseating granulomas lack central necrosis (Fig. 2.2A). Common etiologies
include reaction to foreign material, sarcoidosis, beryllium exposure, Crohn
disease, and cat scratch disease.
2. Caseating granulomas exhibit central necrosis and are characteristic of
tuberculosis and fungal infections (Fig. 2.2B).
D. Steps involved in granuloma formation

---

•
s*
/
*
FUNDAMENTALS
* TOF' aPATHOLOGY
y

16

*

1. Macrophages process and present antigen via MHC class II to CD4 + helper T
cells.
2. Interaction leads macrophages to secrete IL-12, inducing CD4 + helper T cells to
differentiate into T H1 subtype.
3. TH1cells secrete IFN-γ, which converts macrophages to epithelioid histiocytes
and giant cells.

PRIMARY IMMUNODEFICIENCY
I. DIGEORGE SYNDROME
A. Developmental failure of the third and fourth pharyngeal pouches
1. Due to 22q11 microdeletion
B. Presents with T-cell deficiency (lack of thymus); hypocalcemia (lack of parathyroids);
and abnormalities of heart, great vessels, and face
II. SEVERE COMBINED IMMUNODEFICIENCY (SCID)
A. Defective cell-mediated and humoral immunity
B. Etiologies include
1. Cytokine receptor defects - Cytokine signaling is necessary for proliferation
and maturation of B and T cells.
2. Adenosine deaminase (ADA) deficiency - ADA is necessary to deaminate
adenosine and deoxyadenosine for excretion as waste products; buildup of
adenosine and deoxyadenosine is toxic to lymphocytes.
3. MHC class II deficiency - MHC class II is necessary for CD4 + helper T cell
activation and cytokine production.
C. Characterized by susceptibility to fungal, viral, bacterial, and protozoal infections,
including opportunistic infections and live vaccines
D. Treatment is sterile isolation ('bubble baby') and stem cell transplantation.
Ill. X-LINKED AGAMMAGLOBULINEMIA
A. Complete lack of immunoglobulin due to disordered B-cell maturation
1. Pre- and pro-B cells cannot mature.
B. Due to mutated Bruton tyrosine kinase; X-linked
C. Presents after 6 months of life with recurrent bacterial, enterovirus (e.g., polio and
coxsackievirus), and Giardia lamblia infections; maternal antibodies present during
the first 6 months of life are protective.
D. Live vaccines (e.g., polio) must be avoided.
IV. COMMON VARIABLE IMMUNODEFICIENCY (CVID)
A. Low immunoglobulin due to B-cell or helper T-cell defects

Fig. 2.2 Granuloma. A, Noncaseating. B, Caseating.

Fig. 2.3 Angioedema. (Courtesy of James
Heilman, MD, Wikipedia)

---

Inflammation, Inflammatory Disorders, and Wound Healing

17

B. Increased risk for bacterial, enterovirus, and Giardia lamblia infections, usually in
late childhood
C. Increased risk for autoimmune disease and lymphoma
V. IgA DEFICIENCY
A. Low serum and mucosal IgA; most common immunoglobulin deficiency
B. Increased risk for mucosal infection, especially viral; however, most patients are
asymptomatic.
VI. HYPER-IgM SYNDROME
A. Characterized by elevated IgM
B. Due to mutated CD40L (on helper T cells) or CD40 receptor (on B cells)
1. Second signal cannot be delivered to helper T cells during B-cell activation.
2. Consequently, cytokines necessary for immunoglobulin class switching are not
produced.
C. Low IgA, IgG, and IgE result in recurrent pyogenic infections (due to poor
opsonization), especially at mucosal sites.
VII. WISKOTT-ALDRICH SYNDROME
A. Characterized by thrombocytopenia, eczema, and recurrent infections (defective
humoral and cellular immunity); bleeding is a major cause of death
B. Due to mutation in the WASP gene; X-linked
VIII. COMPLEMENT DEFICIENCIES
A. C5-C9 deficiencies-increased risk for Neisseria infection (N gonorrhoeae and N
meningitidis)
B. Cl inhibitor deficiency-results in hereditary angioedema, which is characterized by
edema of the skin (especially periorbital, Fig. 2.3) and mucosal surfaces

AUTOIMMUNE DISORDERS
I. BASIC PRINCIPLES
A. Characterized by immune-mediated damage of self tissues
1. US prevalence is 1%-2%.
B. Involves loss of self-tolerance
1. Self-reactive lymphocytes are regularly generated but develop central (thymus
and bone marrow) or peripheral tolerance.
2. Central tolerance in thymus leads to T-cell (thymocyte) apoptosis or generation
of regulatory T cells.
i. AIRE mutations result in autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome.
3. Central tolerance in bone marrow leads to receptor editing or B-cell apoptosis.
4. Peripheral tolerance leads to anergy or apoptosis of T and B cells.
i. Fas apoptosis pathway mutations result in autoimmune lymphoproliferative
syndrome (ALPS).
5. Regulatory T cells suppress autoimmunity by blocking T-cell activation and
producing anti-inflammatory cytokines (IL-10 and TGF-β ).
i. CD25 polymorphisms are associated with autoimmunity (MS and type
1DM).
ii. FOXP3 mutations lead to IPEX syndrome (Immune dysregulation,
Polyendocrinopathy, Enteropathy, X-linked).
C. More common in women; classically affects women of childbearing age
1. Estrogen may reduce apoptosis of self-reactive B cells.
D. Etiology is likely an environmental trigger in genetically-susceptible individuals.
1. Increased incidence in twins

---

18

FUNDAMENTALS OF PATHOLOGY
2. Association with certain HLA types (e.g., HLA-B27) and PTPN22 polymorphisms
3. Environmental triggers lead to bystander activation or molecular mimicry.
E. Autoimmune disorders are clinically progressive with relapses and remissions and
often show overlapping features; partially explained by epitope spreading
II. SYSTEMIC LUPUS ERYTHEMATOSUS
A. Chronic, systemic autoimmune disease
1. Flares and remissions are common.
B. Classically arises in middle-aged females, especially African American and Hispanic
women
1. May also arise in children and older adults (less dramatic gender bias)
C. Antigen-antibody complexes damage multiple tissues (type III HSR).
1. Poorly-cleared apoptotic debris (e.g., from UV damage) activates self-reactive
lymphocytes, which then produce antibodies to host nuclear antigens.
2. Antigen-antibody complexes are generated at low levels and taken up by dendritic
cells.
3. DNA antigens activate TLRs, amplifying immune response (IFN-α) .
4. Antigen-antibody complexes are subsequently generated at higher levels and
deposit in multiple tissues causing disease.
5. Deficiency of early complement proteins (C1q, C4, and C2) is associated with
SLE.
D. Almost any tissue can be involved. Classic findings include
1. Fever, weight loss, fatigue, lymphadenopathy, and Raynaud phenomenon
2. Malar 'butterfly' rash (Fig. 2.4A) or discoid rash (Fig. 2.4B), especially upon
exposure to sunlight
3. Oral or nasopharyngeal ulcers (usually painless)
4. Arthritis (usually involving ≥ 2 joints)
5. Serositis (pleuritis and pericarditis)
6. Psychosis or seizures
7. Renal damage
i. Diffuse proliferative glomerulonephritis is the most common and most severe
form of injury.
ii. Other patterns of injury (e.g., membranous glomerulonephritis) also occur.
8. Anemia, thrombocytopenia, or leukopenia (type II HSR)
9. Libman-Sacks endocarditis
10. Antinuclear antibody (ANA; sensitive, but not specific)
11. Anti-dsDNA or anti-Sm antibodies (highly specific)
E. Antiphospholipid antibody is associated with SLE (one-third of patients).
1. Autoantibody directed against proteins bound to phospholipids

Fig. 2.4A Malar 'butterfly' rash, SLE.

Fig. 2.48 Discoid rash, SLE.

---

Inflammation, Inflammatory Disorders, and Wound Healing

19

2. Important antiphospholipid antibodies include anticardiolipin (false-positive
VDRL and RPR syphilis screening tests), anti-β2-glycoprotein I, and lupus
anticoagulant (falsely-elevated PTT).
F. Antiphospholipid antibody syndrome is characterized by hypercoagulable state due
to antiphospholipid antibodies (especially lupus anticoagulant).
1. Results in arterial and venous thrombosis including deep venous, hepatic vein,
placental (recurrent pregnancy loss), and cerebral (stroke) thrombosis
2. Requires lifelong anticoagulation
3. Associated with SLE; however, more commonly occurs as a primary disorder
G. Antihistone antibody is characteristic of drug-induced lupus.
1. Procainamide, hydralazine, and isoniazid are common causes.
2. ANA is positive by definition.
3. CNS and renal involvement are rare.
4. Removal of drug usually results in remission.
H. First-line treatment includes avoiding exposure to direct sunlight and
glucocorticoids for flares; other immunosuppressive agents are useful in severe or
refractory disease.
I. 5-year survival is > 90%; renal failure, infection, and accelerated coronary
atherosclerosis (occurs late) are common causes of death.
III. SJÖGREN SYNDROME
A. Autoimmune destruction of lacrimal and salivary glands
1. Lymphocyte-mediated damage (type IV HSR) with fibrosis
B. Classically presents as dry eyes (keratoconjunctivitis sicca), dry mouth (xerostomia),
and recurrent dental caries in an older woman (50-60 years)-"Can't chew a cracker,
dirt in my eyes"
1. May progress to ulceration of corneal epithelium and oral mucosa
C. Can be primary (sicca syndrome) or associated with another autoimmune disorder,
especially rheumatoid arthritis
1. Rheumatoid factor is often present even when rheumatoid arthritis is absent.
D. Characterized by ANA and anti-ribonucleoprotein antibodies (anti-SSA/Ro and
anti-SSB/La)
1. Anti-SSA and anti-SSB are associated with extraglandular manifestations (e.g.,
neuropathy).
2. Pregnant women with anti-SSA are at risk for delivering babies with neonatal
lupus and congenital heart block.
3. Anti-SSA and anti-SSB are also seen in a subset of patients with SLE (screen
pregnant patients)
E. Lymphocytic sialadenitis on lip biopsy (minor salivary glands) is an additional
diagnostic criterion (Fig. 2.4C).
F. Increased risk for B-cell (marginal zone) lymphoma, which presents as unilateral
enlargement of the parotid gland late in disease course
IV. SYSTEMIC SCLEROSIS (SCLERODERMA)
A. Autoimmune disorder characterized by sclerosis of skin and visceral organs
1. Classically presents in middle-aged females (30-50 years)
B. Fibroblast activation leads to deposition of collagen.
1. Autoimmune damage to mesenchyme is possible initiating event.
2. Endothelial dysfunction leads to inflammation (increased adhesion molecules),
vasoconstriction (increased endothelin and decreased NO), and secretion of
growth factors (TGF-β and PDGF).
3. Fibrosis, initially perivascular, progresses and causes organ damage.

---

20

FUNDAMENTALS OF PATHOLOGY
C. Limited type-Skin involvement is limited (hands and face) with late visceral
involvement.
1. Prototype is CREST syndrome: Calcinosis/anti-Centromere antibodies,
Raynaud phenomenon, Esophageal dysmotility, Sclerodactyly (Fig. 2.4D), and
Telangiectasias of the skin.
D. Diffuse type-Skin involvement is diffuse with early visceral involvement.
1. Any organ can be involved.
2. Commonly involved organs include
i. Vessels (Raynaud phenomenon)
ii. GI tract (esophageal dysmotility and reflux)
iii. Lungs (interstitial fibrosis and pulmonary hypertension)
iv. Kidneys (scleroderma renal crisis)
3. Highly associated with antibodies to DNA topoisomerase I (anti-Scl-70).
V. MIXED CONNECTIVE TISSUE DISEASE
A. Autoimmune-mediated tissue damage with mixed features of SLE, systemic
sclerosis, and polymyositis
B. Characterized by ANA along with serum antibodies to U1 ribonucleoprotein

WOUND HEALING
I. BASIC PRINCIPLES
A. Healing is initiated when inflammation begins.
B. Occurs via a combination of regeneration and repair
II. REGENERATION
A. Replacement of damaged tissue with native tissue; dependent on regenerative
capacity of tissue
B. Tissues are divided into three types based on regenerative capacity: labile, stable, and
permanent.
C. Labile tissues possess stem cells that continuously cycle to regenerate the tissue.
1. Small and large bowel (stem cells in mucosal crypts, Fig. 2.5)
2. Skin (stem cells in basal layer, Fig. 2.6)
3. Bone marrow (hematopoietic stem cells)
D. Stable tissues are comprised of cells that are quiescent (G 0) , but can reenter the cell
cycle to regenerate tissue when necessary.
1. Classic example is regeneration of liver by compensatory hyperplasia after partial
resection. Each hepatocyte produces additional cells and then reenters
quiescence.

Fig. 2.4C Lymphocytic sialadenitis, Sjögren
syndrome.

Fig. 2.4D Sclerodactyly, scleroderma.

Fig. 2.5 Intestinal crypts.

---

, Inflammatory
Disorders,
Wound
and and
Healing
Inflammation
Inflammation,
Inflammatory
Disorders,
Wound
Healing

21

E. Permanent tissues lack significant regenerative potential (e.g., myocardium, skeletal
muscle, and neurons).
III. REPAIR
A. Replacement of damaged tissue with fibrous scar
B. Occurs when regenerative stem cells are lost (e.g., deep skin cut) or when a tissue
lacks regenerative capacity (e.g., healing after a myocardial infarction, Fig. 2.7)
C. Granulation tissue formation is the initial phase of repair (Fig. 2.8).
1. Consists of fibroblasts (deposit type III collagen), capillaries (provide nutrients),
and myofibroblasts (contract wound)
D. Eventually results in scar formation, in which type III collagen is replaced with type
I collagen
1. Type III collagen is pliable and present in granulation tissue, embryonic tissue,
uterus, and keloids.
2. Type I collagen has high tensile strength and is present in skin, bone, tendons,
and most organs.
3. Collagenase removes type III collagen and requires zinc as a cofactor.
IV. MECHANISMS OF TISSUE REGENERATION AND REPAIR
A. Mediated by paracrine signaling via growth factors (e.g., macrophages secrete
growth factors that target fibroblasts)
B. Interaction of growth factors with receptors (e.g., epidermal growth factor with
growth factor receptor) results in gene expression and cellular growth.
C. Examples of mediators include
1. TGF-α - epithelial and fibroblast growth factor
2. TGF-β - important fibroblast growth factor; also inhibits inflammation
3. Platelet-derived growth factor - growth factor for endothelium, smooth muscle,
and fibroblasts
4. Fibroblast growth factor - important for angiogenesis; also mediates skeletal
development
5. Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) - important for angiogenesis
V. NORMAL AND ABERRANT WOUND HEALING
A. Cutaneous healing occurs via primary or secondary intention.
1. Primary intention-Wound edges are brought together (e.g., suturing of a
surgical incision); leads to minimal scar formation
2. Secondary intention-Edges are not approximated. Granulation tissue fills the
defect; myofibroblasts then contract the wound, forming a scar.
B. Delayed wound healing occurs in
1. Infection (most common cause; S aureus is the most common offender)

Fig. 2.6 Basal layer of skin.

Fig. 2.7 Myocardial scarring. (Courtesy of
Aliya Husain.MD)

Fig. 2.8 Granulation tissue.

---

22

FUNDAMENTALS OF PATHOLOGY
2. Vitamin C, copper, or zinc deficiency
i. Vitamin C is an important cofactor in the hydroxylation of proline and
lysine procollagen residues; hydroxylation is necessary for eventual collagen
cross-linking.
ii. Copper is a cofactor for lysyl oxidase, which cross-links lysine and
hydroxylysine to form stable collagen.
iii. Zinc is a cofactor for collagenase, which replaces the type III collagen of
granulation tissue with stronger type I collagen.
3. Other causes include foreign body, ischemia, diabetes, and malnutrition.
C. Dehiscence is rupture of a wound; most commonly seen after abdominal surgery
D. Hypertrophic scar is excess production of scar tissue that is localized to the wound
(Fig. 2.9).
E. Keloid is excess production of scar tissue that is out of proportion to the wound (Fig.
2.10).

1. Characterized by excess type III collagen
2. Genetic predisposition (more common in African Americans)
3. Classically affects earlobes, face, and upper extremities

Fig. 2.9 Hypertrophic scar. (Reprinted with
permission, http://emedicine.medscape.com/
article/1128404-overview)

Fig. 2.10 Keloid.